it comes at you as a breeze as a gust as
a gale or in the scariest of situations
a hurricane or tornado at speeds up to
400 kilometers an hour moving air can be
as delightful as it can be frightening
but how does wind happen here's one
sentence answer wind is caused by air
flowing from an area of high pressure to
an area of low pressure long answer is
that there are a bunch of variables that
affect wind formation speed and
direction including the Sun and the
Earth's rotation let's back it up a bit
the air that's all around you it's made
of nitrogen molecules about 78% oxygen
molecules about 21% and water vapor
between one and four percent when we
talk about air pressure we're talking
about the amount of force that these
molecules exert on a given area when a
massive air warms it rises and therefore
exerts less pressure on the surface and
especially if that air is moist that
rising air can become unstable and
create cloudy rainy even stormy
conditions that's why low pressure
systems are often associated with bad
weather but that low you see on the
weather map is only low in relation to
the air around it there's always a
massive cooler drier air usually coming
in from a polar region waiting to rush
in push that low out of the way and sit
right on top of the land that's a high
pressure system and when it dominates
clear skies usually come with it so
think of the wind as the atmosphere is
eternally futile struggled to find a
balance between these two competing
systems air flows from a high pressure
to low pressure systems to try to reach
equilibrium and in doing so creates wind
The Closer the high and low-pressure
areas are to each other the stronger the
wind now unsurprisingly the Sun plays a
big part in all of this as it heats the
surface of the earth about two percent
of all the sun's energy that reaches our
planet is eventually converted into wind
energy a small portion which we humans
tried to harness the spin of our planet
also plays an important role if the
earth didn't rotate global winds would
pretty much blow in straight lines with
cold air flowing from the poles heating
up the equator and then going back again
but the Earth's rotation produces a
force on everything that's moving
relative to the earth including air
masses a phenomenon known as the
Coriolis effect that rotation deflects
the direction of the winds to the right
in the northern hemisphere and to the
left in the southern hemisphere
put it together and these forces can do
amazing things according to most sources
the highest surface wind speed ever
recorded was at the top of Mount
Washington in New Hampshire wind gusts
during a particularly brutal storm in
1934 topped out at 372 km/h but in 1996
instruments about ten meters above the
surface recorded winds of 408 kilometers
per hour during cyclone Olivia off the
coast of Australia it's all the same to
you I'll just take my gentle fall breeze
thank you very much
and thank you to all of our viewers
especially our subbable subscribers for
continuing to support scishow shot here
in the Keith Jim studio if you have a
question or a comment or just a good
idea you can contact us on Facebook or
Twitter or down in the comments below
and don't forget to go to
youtube.com/scishow and subscribe
you